Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Loops. And today I'm
joined by Dr Tobias Gerstenberg. He is an assistant
professor of psychology at Stanford University where he leads
the causality cognition lab, his research is focused on
higher level cognitive phenomena such as causal influence and
moral judgment. And today we're talking about causal cognition,
how basically people think about causality and how it
connects to attributions of moral responsibility. So Doctor Gerstenberg,
welcome to the show. It's a huge pleasure to
everyone.
Awesome. Yeah. Thanks so much for having me.
So let me start with perhaps a basic question.
So what is causal cognition? I mean, as a
psychologist, when you study this phenomenon, what are you
really interested in? What kinds of questions do you
usually tackle?
Yeah. So I think there's at least sort of
maybe two aspects to to the answer to that
question. One of which being is that, you know,
causal cognition, partly studies how people think about causality
in the world. And but then it also relates
to how causality shapes the way that we think,
right? And so when thinking about the world, I
think it's sort of useful to maybe delineate like
three different areas like of causal cognition and there's
the area of causal learning. So that's how we
learn about the causal structure of the world. And
might also be just how we learn about the
relationship between particular variables where this could be like
um figuring out whether some, you know, drug actually
cures diseases or not. Um BUT also learning more
complex things like how, how several you know, variables
of phenomena in the world are related to one
another or how certain kind of causal mechanisms work.
And that can be studied from a developmental perspective,
how Children learn about the causal structure of the
world. But even for adults, we do causal learning
often as we encounter new, you know, domains play
new games or something like that. So then as
a secondary, there's the area of causal reasoning, right
there, the idea is OK, we already know now
to some extent how the causal world works and
how do we now use that knowledge um to
be effective in the world, right? And that could
be things like predicting what's going to happen in
the future. It could be things like making inferences
about what may have happened in the past, like
a detective who comes to a crime scene and
now wants to figure out OK, what happened, right?
Given the kind of evidence that they're seeing um
and it could also be things like thinking about
how things could have played out differently from how
they actually did, like sort of reasoning, you know,
counter factually and, and planning and taking good actions.
Those are all things that um causal reasoning um
relates to. And then there's also like um a
separate area maybe. And that's the area that I've
maybe mo most focused on in my research and
that's how we um make causal judgments and how
we give explanations of what happened, right? So when
there is, you know, some phenomenon that come came
about and often there might be multiple factors that
contributed to it. How do we decide when somebody
asks us? OK, why did this happen? How do
we give explanations to those kinds of questions? So,
so those are sort of separate areas of causal
cognition, I would say, right, causal learning, causal reasoning
and causal judgment and then another separate area, but
not sure that it falls within causal cognition is
causal perception, right? That's just how we sometimes get
the impression that we can really um quite immediately
perceive causal events in the world. But if you
see like, you know, 2 billion balls kind of
colliding on a screen, we have the sense if
they have the right sort of structure to this
collision that we can directly see that. Yeah, that,
that first one caused the second one to move.
Um BUT there's a little bit of a discussion
and or quite a bit of a discussion in
cognitive science and about the relationship between, you know,
perception and cognition. So that's why I'm not quite
sure whether I should put it into the, the,
the field of causal cognition. But it's another area
to do with causality that people in, in psychology
and cognitive science are very interested in.
But what, what is causality exactly from a psychological
perspective? What does it mean to attribute causality to
something to an event or something like that?
Yeah, that's a great question also. And it's probably
something that at least I've also taken inspiration from
work and philosophy, right? So because they are also,
you know, very interested often in the metaphysical questions,
right? That the sort of what it is, right?
And then maybe I'll talk a little bit about
that and then kind of maybe what it is
from a psychological perspective. So the inspiration for me
from the philosophical literature has been that there were
these um two large uh and different kind of
frameworks for how people um have thought about kind
of what causality is. And there's one kind of
framework of theories that are sometimes called um process
and theories of causation. And, and for them, what
causality really is is a sort of some transfer
of some quantity. Again, if you think about kind
of billiard ball collisions as the sort of paradigmatic
case of causality. So what it means therefore for
something to have caused another is that this one
ball uh um transferred some kind of quantity, maybe
like momentum, you know, to the other ball. And
that's what made it move, right? And so this
kind of thinking about causation is very well suited,
you know, to thinking about the physical world, but
sometimes a little bit less clear of how we
would apply such a notion of causation to other
kind of more complex phenomena like, you know, the
economy or even when people, you know, um do
things in the world and when, when, when it's
their thoughts that cause their actions, it's not so
clear how this more a force based or process
based model could explain those kinds of phenomenon. Then
there's another camp of thinking about causation also from
philosophy that I call sometimes more like dependence theories
of causation. And then so and the basic ideas
of what it means for something to cause the
other thing is that these things are dependent on
each other in a particular kind of way, right?
And then different um dependence theories characterized what this
dependence means in different ways. And I'll just highlight
one of them because it's the closest to home
for me. And that's what's called a counterfactual theory
of causation. And what that basically says. So in
simple terms is to say, well, what does it
mean for A to have caused B let's say
to happen? Right? It's to say that B would
not have happened if a had not happened and
it's a more kind of um generic notion of
um of counterfactual dependence. That's also sometimes then um
kind of fleshed out in more particular ways. And
we can talk about that in a moment. That's
what's called like an an interventionist framework. So that
and says like, oh, what it really means to
cause something is to say like, well, if I
did something about this first thing, something to the
second thing would happen, right? If I, if I
were to wiggle in a, something should happen to
be. Um AND what's appealing about this notion of
causation is that it's kind of much more uh
general and you could see how that could also
apply to something like an economic system that we
might, we might ask like, oh, you know, did
the Lehman Brothers, the fall of the Lehman Brothers
back then cause the financial crisis, we could at
least sort of entertain this kind of factual of
what would have happened if they had been bailed
out. Um WHAT could have happened to the financial
system. So it's in some sense, a more flexible
notion of thinking about causation that can apply to
a variety of um uh of phenomena. And, and
that view of causation has also been quite popular,
I would say in, in psychology.
And so when it comes to the sort of
counterfactual model of causation, what do we need that
for? I mean, why do we need to imagine
particular scenarios that might have happened because if they
might have happened, but didn't happen. Why does that
matter to us? Psychologically?
Yeah. No, that's a great question too. So, and,
um, and, and I should say again in philosophy,
that's what some, um, some philosophers don't like counterfactual
because they say they have this kind of, yeah,
metaphysically dubious status, let's say just as you put
it like, oh, why should it matter? Something that,
you know, never really mattered, right? That, that, that
never really happened because that's kind of in the
word, right? Of the counterfactual. It's counter to fact
it did not happen, right? And so, um and,
and, and maybe I'll build it up a little
bit that the answer to that question if you
know, if, if that's OK. So, first of all,
yeah, what is, what is a counterfactual, right? A
counterfactual. Um At least when we think about, you
know, from a psychological perspective is a thought about
something that, you know, didn't happen and thinking about
how um maybe it could have happened differently from
how it actually did and what the consequences of
that would have been. Right? And so now you
ask kind of, you know, what's what that's useful
for, right? And so, so they'll take kind of
inspiration from Judea Pearl who is a, you know,
touring award winning um computer scientist. Um AND, and
he's delineated what he calls like a ladder of
causation, a ladder like the kind of ladder that
you climb on, you know, when you try to
go up the um go up somewhere in this
case, the letter only has three rungs. So it's
a short letter. Um AND, and, and, and, and,
and what he puts is like that the kind
of causal knowledge that we, that we have about
the world can be characterized by these um different
rungs on the letter. And on the first rung
is what, what he says, he puts them um
the level of, you know, correlation and and sometimes
they can also be sort of thought of as
the kind of, you know, conditional reasoning that we
can do about the world, sort of like, you
know, if A then B right? And um and
correlations are really helpful for making predictions about the
world and making inferences about the world. But we
probably also, you know, many of us may have
learned from their, you know, stats classes on school
that, that, you know, and correlation doesn't equal causation,
right? And just to give sort of an intuitive
example, maybe of what that means. So imagine that,
you know, you have the flu and there's like
two symptoms that you have from the flu, right?
You and it causes you to have a fever
and it also causes you to have a cough,
let's say um but we now happen to know
the causal model of that, right. That it's sort
of, you know, the flu that causes the fever
and that causes the cough. But maybe you, maybe,
let's say you didn't know you just had these
three different variables and all you had was like
information about how they co occur over time, right?
Just correlational information. So just based on that, for
example, um you could be inclined to think that
it's actually, you know, the cough that causes the
fever or that it's the fever that causes the
cough. Um OR that like um you know, the
fever causes the flu or something like that, right?
So, because you can say like, oh if I
have a cough, then I have a fever. Um
So the correlations in themselves doesn't give, they give
some hints about possible causal relationships, but they don't
give it away, right? Um So that's the first
run, right? It's just like being able to observe
correlations in the world that help us make predictions
or make inferences from one thing to another on
the second one is then the level of causation.
And um and the key difference between um thinking
causally and thinking just in terms of um um
you know, well, conditionally about correlations between events is
that um causes support interventions, right? The idea is
not to say like, well, if I know that
is a causal structure and I know that A
causes b let's say, or that the um that
the flu in this case causes the fever. I
know that if I want the fever to stop,
I have to do something about the flu, right.
But if I want the flu to stop uh
intervening in the fever is not really going to
be helpful, right. That might, you know, again, cure
a symptom, but it's not going to cure the
cause of the disease, right. So by being able
to distinguish between um yeah, these kind of interventions
and, and others just sort of correlational relationships, we
get this distinction between the run one and run
two and, and that's often like much of the
sciences sort of stay there in these two things.
That's often all we can do, even in like,
you know, in psychology, we can do randomized control
trials. And that's essentially sort of the the run
two thing where we kind of intervene by randomly
assigning one group of people to the treatment and
the other people not to the treatment. And then
as an outcome of that, we get like a
difference between the two that tells us something about,
you know, whether there is some um yeah, difference
that the that the cause makes um then on
the third level like, and so that's not enough,
right? There's a third level and that's the level
according to um um pearl of counterfactual reasoning or
the level also um at which we give explanations
and this is answering kind of why questions like
why did something happen, right? And, and maybe if
we go back to this example of the, um,
you know, of the, um, of the, of the
Randomized Control trial, right? So let's say you, you
do this, you, you, you know, have 20 participants,
um, um, you put 20 of them in the,
in the, in the group without a treatment and
then let's say kind of 10, you know, be
good afterwards and 10 don't. Right. And then you
put uh 20 people in the group, um with
the treatment and now, you know, 16 people, um,
feel good afterwards and, and four people don't. Right.
Um So that gives you some sense that like,
ok, overall there is an an average effect like
of that treatment, right? It seems to people are
better with it than, than they are. Um, WITHOUT
it, maybe with these small numbers, you wouldn't really,
you would still be a little bit unsure. But
that was just, you know, for the example. But
ultimately, you might now take the perspective of one
of the people, maybe one of the 16 people
in the, in the treatment group and they now
ask themselves, did I actually get better because of
the treatment? And that's a kind of actual question
in some sense, right? Because it's sort of asking
from that person's perspective. Had I not gotten the
treatment? Would I not also have been good? Right?
It's sort of basically asking the question was the
treatment, the cause of me getting better. Right. And
there's many possible combinations that could arise for this
difference. But it could be like, actually the treatment,
you know, helped some people who would have otherwise
been worse. But it's also possible that there's a
small proportion for whom the treatment was actually bad.
You know, they would have been, you know, better
off. Maybe some of these four people who had
got, um, who, you know, didn't, didn't have a
good outcome, maybe a few of them would have
been good, had they not gotten the treatment? Right?
So in some sense, right, like coming back now
to the question, what the kind of factuals are
useful for? They're ultimately the kind of thing that
we want to rely on when giving explanations, when
answering why questions. And my, my colleague here at
Stanford and Thomas Eicher in philosophy and his student
um delegate, I have sort of also put it
in this way as saying, so the difference between
level one and two is sort of, you know,
correlation is not causation. And then the difference between
level two and three is also saying causation is
not explanation. So just having causal knowledge of the
world is not enough necessarily to give explanations of
why something happened. And that's often what we are
in psychology interested in. Like, you know, why did
this crime happen? Who was it? Uh WHY did
they do it? And, and that's what we need
kind of factual reasoning for.
Mhm. Uh, SO, I mean, in people's daily lives,
I guess that it's not very often that we
have access or can do randomized control trials. So,
I guess that when it comes to learning about
specific causes behind specific events, taking into account that,
uh, sort of interventionist approach, that's also something that
people many times rely on to learn about or
try to infer as best as possible what causes
a particular thing to happen.
That's right. Yeah. And, and it's true that, you
know, we randomly, oh, sorry, rarely find ourselves in
the position to, to do such a randomized control
trial, right? We, we certainly do experiment, you know,
with ourselves, like in our everyday lives, like we
say like, oh, you know, you have an upset
stomach and you might, you might change around, but
it is that you eat right, but it's kind
of hard, right? Also to trace back the causality
uh in those kinds of cases and they're never
as clean, let's say, as the randomized control trials
are because part of one important thing is that
there's a high cause of dependence right? Between me
yesterday and me today and so on that you
can kind of break when, um, when doing RCTS.
And, but on the other hand, you know, we
often already have quite good, um, what I, and,
and, and, and others in, in, in psychology have
called intuitive theories of how the world works, right?
We have good kind of intuitive theories about how
the physical world works, right? How, you know, objects
interact with each other and you know, make stuff
happen again, could be in big balls world. But
like, you know, all lots of sports are good
examples for how good, you know, our intuitive theories
and how impressive, you know, they, they can be.
Um AND similarly, we have good intuitive theories about
psychology about how people work, right? And so those
are things that we can draw on um to
try and give answers to those why questions, right?
If I want to. Um AND, and the law,
for example, also often, you know, asks jury members,
you know, to do so, it asks them to
apply different kind of counterfactual tests, for example, when,
when establishing, you know, causation. So it sometimes asks
them to say like, OK, you know, was the
action that the defender took, was that the cause
of the, of the negative outcome? Would it not
have happened? Had they not done that? Um And,
and similarly, they might ask something like whether a
reasonable person would have um you know, acted the
same way as the defender did in a particular
situation. That's also quite a sophisticated counterfactual test, right?
Where we now have to imagine putting that reasonable
person into that situation and then sort of running
in our minds like how this whole situation would
have unfolded if the reasonable person, whoever that is,
would have been in the same situation, right? But
our capacity to have these mental models of the
world and to make changes in them in our
minds, right? Where the intervention is not actually happening
in the real world in some sense where the
intervention is just happening in my mind. And but
because I have this structured knowledge of the world,
I'm capable of doing that, I'm capable of imagining
how would the scene have unfolded if some object
had not been there and then simulating the consequence
of that in my mind and thereby kind of
give a potential answer to the question of whether
it happened, you know, because of that.
So it's also useful because it allows for us
to at least to a certain extent, acquire further
knowledge about how things work even without necessarily having
to try them out also because I would imagine
that in particular instances, it wouldn't be feasible or
it could even be injuries depending on what we're
talking about.
Yeah. Yeah, that's right. And, and I think that's
right. And that's still like I would also say
a really sort of deep puzzle, I think that
hasn't been solved and that I've been sort of
mulling over for some time and I'll, I'll maybe
try to get a hint of, you know, what
the puzzle here is, at least because um um
as you put it right, it, it, um and
there's several frameworks that also say that but more
kind of um you know, conceptual theories, maybe theories
that haven't really been worked out in concrete detail
yet computationally. But where the idea is that, yeah,
I learned something like through doing these kind of
factual simulations, right? Um And, and intuitively, we, we
might often sense that, right? We might say like,
oh I did something, it turned out poorly, I
regret it, right? And even the feeling of regret
already is a counterfactual emotion, right? Because it's basically
saying, you know, what does it mean to feel
regret? Well, it means that I feel like I
could have done something different and I believe that
doing something different would have resulted in a better
outcome, right? Um Now, the curious thing about um
that being a signal to potentially learning about the
world is that in order to um compute, you
know, what the counterfactual is, I need to use
my intuitive understanding of how the world works, right?
So that's wrong, right. Let's say I have the
wrong theory about how, you know, the physical world
works or about how somebody would have done when
I now simulate that counterfactual. I'm not getting the
correct answer, but I'm just getting like an incorrect
answer. That's based on my theory. So it's kind
of curious a little bit um how it is
that we can learn from that, right? Because it
feels like in order to simulate it I need
my theory of how the world works. But if
my theory is wrong, I'm going to simulate the
wrong thing. So how could I learn from that?
So, it's a little bit like the, you know,
the cat, um, biting itself in its tail and,
um, uh, or the snake, I don't know who,
what animal bites itself in his tail. But, um,
and so that's still like a, a puzzle because
on the one hand, it feels like, yeah, it
serves as a learning signal. But on the other
hand, it's also not quite clear how that could
be the case. So, so that's still something that
we as cognitive scientists have have to figure out.
But when it comes to the intuitive ideas or
models of the world that we have that you
mentioned there, do we have any idea if some
of those intuitions are innate to us or if
they are the result of some development and learning?
I mean, is it that we are born with
certain psychological predispositions to expect things to be in
certain way when it comes to the physical world,
other people? And if so would that connect in
any way to what some psychologists and anthropologists study
and call a core knowledge. There is folk physics,
folk psychology and so on.
Yeah, those are deeply connected. You're, you're exactly right.
I'm, I'm, you know, not a developmental psychologist myself
although I dabble in it and take, you know,
inspiration from it. And um and there's certainly this
idea also coming back to causality, right? Like, I
mean, Emmanuel Kant also famously says that that's just
like, that's a sort of a core principle like,
um and then later, you know, we rediscovered or
just like, reworded is that people think like, yeah,
that's just the basic building block of thinking. We
can't help but think causally, that's just sort of
how our mind works, right? And then with respect
to these um kind of folk theories or intuitive
theories, how they're sometimes called in cognitive signs. Um
Yes, there is a lot of work looking specifically
also like into uh as you mentioned um and
um infants intuitive theory of, of the physical world
and infants intuitive theory of, you know, um the
the psychological world, the social world. And there are
certain principles that come, you know, very early in
age, right? Like um so really almost like, I
don't remember, you know, how young, how, how how
many months the Children have to be like for
a while, like, you know, Jean Pierre famously also
thought that it took a while for Children to
um or for, you know, young babies to realize
um object permanence, right? It was the idea like,
oh if it's not, you know, out of sight,
out of mind, kind of, right? And then Elizabeth
Spy did these very beautiful experiments, right? Where I
don't know whether you know of those but where
it's like um you know, this contraption where there's
an object, a little cube behind this kind of
flapping, um you know, wooden board, right? And the
idea is that the board comes up so that
the infant cannot see the object behind anymore. But
then the board goes all the way down like
flat. And when that happens, the the the infant
is surprised, right? And um so looks longer than
in the situation in which it stops at the
time where, you know, the object is there, right?
And so this kind of beautiful experiment shows that
like even from the very young age, right? Um
And again, unfortunately, I forgot exactly how old the
Children were but very young, um they already have
that sense of object permanence, right? And then in
a similar way, they also have a sense of
continuity in, in motion, right? So that objects don't
suddenly kind of like, you know, speed up and
slow down and so on. And, and so there
are these very basic building blocks that um that
I think we start off with and then sort
of, you know, bootstrap our way as we are
sort of having direct experiences with the world. But
also, you know, using our minds to think about
the world to build the more, you know, sophisticated
knowledge of, of the world um that we have
later on in a similar way. Um MAYBE in
people's intuitive understanding of the psychological world. Right. Um,
EVEN infants might already have a sense that, um,
agents are driven by goals. Right. And, and desires
and that they tend to pursue those goals in
efficient ways. Right. That it's, if they want to
get from A to B, they're not going to
take some very roundabout way to get to A
to B or they would find that surprising. Right.
But then there's additional components to our intuitive, um
understanding of psychology, such as the appreciation that people
can have, you know, beliefs about the world and
that sometimes these beliefs might be wrong. But then
we have false beliefs about the world and that
we can understand that somebody would act in a
way. Um That's, you know, from my perspective, um
you know, stupid but, but just because they know
something different, right? And that appreciation like develops, you
know, much later. But again, I think the assumption
often is this just as you put it that
there are certain core knowledge. Um uh SO certain
things that come from very, very early on and
that we then just have a very powerful kind
of general inference machine powered to a large extent,
you know, by causality that then allows us to
build much more sophisticated um theories of, of how
the world works.
No, I I am aware, aware of those experiments
done by Dr Elizabeth Spelke. They are really fascinating
and I, unfortunately, I haven't had the opportunity of
having her on the show perhaps some day I
would really love to talk with her about them
because they are really interesting. So, let me ask
you another thing now. So what is causation by
a mission?
Yeah. So that's that phenomenon, right? So you can
sort of contrast and uh mission. So that's sort
of like stuff happening. So, like some event happens,
like I, you know, somebody throws the ball at
me and I hit it with the baseball bat
and you know, it flies through the air, you
might say, ok, that's a case of, you know,
um, causation by commission, right? But now let's take
a different example, right? Somebody throws the ball at
me. I miss it, right? I strike past it
and the ball hits a window like in the,
you know, and the window shatters like behind me.
But I was playing with my friends, let's say,
um, and now you might, you might ask yourself
like, oh, you know, the window shatter because Toby
missed the ball, right? Um And so, so here
missing, missing the ball, right is like something that
didn't happen, right? Not hitting the ball. How could
that be a cause? Right? Of something that happens?
And intuitively we do that quite often though, right?
We might say like, ok, you know, if I
hit the ball like, you know, 100 times now,
every time the person, you know, lobbed it to
me and on, on the 101st time the other
person loves the ball just as they do every
time, but I miss it. Right? And it goes
through, through the window, you might think like, yeah,
that was the, that was the cause, right? And,
and not like the person actually threw the ball
right where you might say like, OK, that's the
kind of more process like cause right, where from
throwing the ball to like hitting the window, there's
this kind of nice um causal process, right? That
connects these events. Um But nonetheless, we still might
be more inclined to, you know, blame the person
or say that it happened because of the person
in this case, me who missed the ball, right?
And so this is this kind of phenomenon, right?
When is it that we would cite an omission,
something not happening as a cause, right? The law
also again, does it, you know, very often there's
a notion of negligence, right? A negligence means that
a person, you know, failed to do something that
they should have done and something happened, you know,
because of that. Um THERE'S some um so, so
certainly psychologically something we do, you know, all the
time, right? It might not be. Um YEAH, the
kind of things again that are cited as causes
like in some sort of, you know, in the
physical world. Although of course, causation like in physics
is a separate sort of complicated um uh uh
problem. Um But, but, but just to also highlight
like, one of the problems that arises with that
is to say like, OK, um So let's say
we are citing certain events of uh certain omissions
like as causes and, and again, these kind of
also counterfactual theories, they're kind of OK with that,
right? Because you can say like, yeah, uh it's
Toby missing the ball that caused, you know, the
window to shatter in this case. And, and what
one might mean by saying that is like had
Toby not, you know, missed the ball, then everything
would have been fine, right? Um But on the
other hand, if we now allow for that, like,
you know, why is it to be missing the
ball that caused the window to shatter and not
like, you know, some other person missing the ball,
like there could have been someone else, but you
could have blocked it. Maybe the queen of England
could have been, well, she's not alive anymore. Now,
maybe the king of England, you know, the queen
of England was used as a standard example, I
guess, but that needs to be revised now. Um
SO the king of England could have hit the
ball, right? In principle, you know, no reason not
to. So the problem is that like, you know,
uh by allowing for omissions to count as cause
you arrive what's sometimes called this kind of proliferation
problem of causation, right? Because now every anything goes,
right? Like, because, because if you allow for emissions,
you know, to be as causes, there's, there's an
infinite number of omissions at any given point in
time, right? Um And so then this question arises
like, OK, how do we pick out, you know,
some omissions um but not others, but as the,
as the relevant causal factors and there are at
least what sort of, you know, cognitive scientists have
um sort of, you know, um come up with
as a, as a sort of natural explanation that
covers um many people's intuition intuitions is that expectations
are really critical for this case, right. So that
we have expectations about how things, you know, should
be done. Um So these might be, um these
might be prescriptive expectations, right. That's kind of, yeah,
how it should be done. They might be or,
or sort of normative expectations, they might be statistical
expectations that are just based on how things, you
know, tend to be, right? They might also be
sometimes they're called, um, you know, functional norms or
norms of proper functioning. That just means again, it's
not kind of prescriptive in the moral sense, but
it's prescriptive in the like, you know, if you
have some, you know, if you have your phone,
the phone is supposed to work in a particular
way, right? When I press that button, it's supposed
to turn on. Right. And if it didn't turn
on there would something be wrong about, you know,
um it's, it's, it's functioning so it's these kind
of normative expectations that affect um what we think
should happen. And when, then, and then when this
expectation is violated, um and when we think that
um had the thing happened, you know, the outcome
would have been different, then we might cite that
um as a cause, right? So just to give
11 other example, like someone's drowning in the ocean,
right? And nobody comes to, to help them, right?
And, and now we say like, OK, you know,
why did the person drown? Right? If there was
a lifeguard, you know, on the beach, right? And
they didn't go. Yes, definitely. Like the lifeguard, it's
the lifeguards fault. This person drowned because, you know,
the lifeguard didn't jump into the water because that's
their job, right? They have the expectation of them
to do that and them not doing it is
something that I would count as a cause, you
know, of this person um a drowning. But if
it's someone who can swim, right, who's also there,
they also don't do anything, right? But I would
not say that that's because of them, you know
that the other person, you know, drowned because they
just didn't have right, the capacity to, to do
the relevant and counterfactual thing. And so I would
not write um judge that, yeah, this person drowned
because this person who cannot swim um you know,
didn't jump into the water because that wouldn't have
been helpful. Then there would have been two people
who drowned. Right. And so, so that's sort of
like, um, so it's interesting phenomenon, right? Causation by
omission, it's counterfactual theories apply well to it. But
uh to, to deal with the problem of proliferation,
we also then need to take into account the
role that expectations play when people choose what things
to, to cite as a cause.
So I, I guess we're already getting here a
little bit also into moral judgment and we'll come
back to that in a second. But I guess
that uh just to comment and perhaps this would
be more of a philosophical comment than a psychological
one because what it, what matters here from the
perspective of psychology is how people think and now
and not how they should think or uh if
it's weird or not how people think, but it's
actually, I would say I would say a bit
of both actually on that, on that front, right.
It's a, it's true that sometimes, you know, we
might push the normative to the, to the philosophers
or so, right? But I think also often like,
you know, in, in psychology, we be asked these
normative questions, right? Because, and that's interesting also for
phenomenon like causal judgment, it's like, you know, what's
the point, right? You might ask, right? Why do
we do this stuff in the first place? Right.
And can we be wrong about it, right? Because
it feels like if this is something that we
are kind of, you know, generally engaging it, then,
then hopefully it should play some kind of role,
right? Like you were saying earlier with um maybe
there is something um useful about the capacity to
um uh simulate counter factuals because it helps us
learn about the world, right? It helps us build
better models of how the world works. It's certainly
critical for uh communicating well about the world. Again,
if you ask me some kind of why question
it's very natural for me to answer it by
referring to a counterfactual. Oh, this happened because of
this and it wouldn't have happened otherwise. And this
helps you now learn about the world and that's
and that's a normative thing, right? I could then
also say, right, oh, there's different possible possible explanations
that I could give this one is better than
some of the other ones. And what does it
mean for it to be better in that case?
Well, there's, there's a few options but it could
be like it's better because you now have a
better model in your mind of how the world
works, right? Or uh or, or sort of and,
or um you are now in a better position
to take actions that allow you to pursue the
goals that are relevant to you, right? And so
in that sense, they're also they're also normative, right?
So I'm, I'm certainly interested in that perspective because
often it turns out if you have the right
um understanding of what the goal is that the
cognitive system or the person is, um, is, is
pursuing that helps you, you know, um, describe the
phenomenon. Well, so I think they're kind of deeply
connected.
No, no, for sure. Uh I was just going
to say with the example of, let's say a
medical doctor that I mean, it's, it's if you
stop to think about it for a, for a
bit, it's still perhaps a little bit weird why
uh through things like for example, negligence, we would
attribute causality to those kinds of things because let's
say that the doctor uh makes the incorrect diagnosis
and fails to deliver or provide the correct treatment
and the person dies from cancer. Let's say I,
I mean, the cause of death, there is the
cancer. It, it's not the v in willing to
provide the treatment. I mean, the doctor, if the
doctor had provided the treatment, it would have been
the cause of the person living, right? So yeah,
but, but yeah, it's, it's, it's a bit weird.
No, no. Yeah, you're right. It's a bit weird.
It's just like an example also maybe that I
had earlier with, you know, me, me missing the
the baseball, right? Somebody might say like, no, it's
the person who threw the baseball, right? That's the
the cancer in your example. That's the cause of
the window shattering, right? And of course, if, if,
if there was no person, you know, standing there
to hit the ball, of course, that would be
the case, right? Um But, but nonetheless, right, it's
the world is complicated, right? And often outcomes um
are the result of many kind of, let's say,
um causes that are sort of like of the
commission kind, right? Things that are actually, um but
then also like often a number of causes that
might be of the omission kind, right? And it's
partly, then um two people might disagree and that
often often also happens, but we may not disagree
about the actual facts. We may, ok, we, we
um you know, when we disagree about something, it
might be that we have different models of what
happened. It might be, it might be that we
have different models of the world that influence um
how the counterfactual might be different. But it could
also be that we have exactly the same uh
understanding of what actually happened. We share exactly the
same model um such that if we were to
think about certain kind of factuals, we would also
agree. But nonetheless, we might still pick different causes,
right? You might still say like, yeah, I, you
know, I share everything that you think, but I
think it was because of the cancer and I
think it was because of the doctor, right? And
that might then have to do also partly with,
you know, what it is that we want, you
know, the person who we're talking to, for example,
to focus on and, and, and to potentially change
and so on. So we're communicating maybe um uh
our beliefs about what we take to be important
in selecting and specific causes.
Mhm. So that's the point where probably things like
social norms or our own self interests play a
role perhaps in the way that we are motivated
to thinking about certain aspects of causation.
That's right. Yeah. And just to get one kind
of, you know, um, um, you know, a terrible
example that unfortunately comes up here, you know, in
the US quite frequently take, take the example of,
you know, school shootings. That's a, that's a, that's
a terrible, you know, um, um, outcome but then
also whenever these things happen, right, you, you see
people, uh they don't necessarily disagree about the facts,
you know, that OK, someone who, um, you know,
um had, uh certainly kind of mental, um, you
know, mental issues and also had a gun, you
know, uh went into the school and, and, and,
and, and shot others but then the cause that
people then, you know, cite as, OK, why it
is that this happened and what it is that
we need to do about it, those differ, right?
With some people saying we need more strict gun
laws and then other people saying it's a mental
health, you know, um, uh, crisis. Right. And, and
so people don't disagree in some sense that both
of these factors, you know, happen, but they give
different explanations because of course they have their motivations
about how they would like, um, the world to
change and some people don't want any gun laws.
So they cite the mental health that other people
think it's, it's terrible, you know, to have, um,
such loose gun laws. Um And, and this kind
of thing doesn't happen in other countries where other
people also have mental health problems and they cite
a different cause. And
actually, yeah, actually there's also people who think that
we, we would need even more guns because if
the teachers were armed
they
have
that's doubling down in some sense. But yeah, you're
right. That's another, that's another way of responding, you
know. Yeah.
So uh but why is it that when there
are several causes contributing to an outcome? I mean,
how do people choose or single out one particular
cause? And why is it that even uh when
they perhaps notice that there might have been different
causes at play, they usually go for one single
cause?
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I think part of the things
that we talked about, you know, touched on this
question already and it's partly also, yeah, what is
the goal of that? Right. There's some kind of
why question that might often happen also in, in
communication, right? It might be, I mean, sometimes it's
possible that I ask this question like myself, right?
Is like, oh, you know, I come, I come
to the fridge, the door is open. It's like,
oh, why is the fridge door open? Right. And
then I think like, oh, ok, it turns out,
you know, the, the milk was a little bit
tilted here. And so I, I put the milk
back close, the fridge, done. RIGHT? I've solved the
crime uh in, in this case, but very often
it's a, it's a, it's a communicative act, right?
Somebody asks me, oh, you know, why did this
happen? And now, and now I, I get to
choose what answer to give to that question, right?
And um and there's two things I think that
we've touched on that I think are particularly important
to this choice, right? This is also like um
um um a kind of phenomenon that sometimes in
philosophy goes under the problem of causal selection, right?
It's like, yeah, there's always a plethora of causes.
Um But how do I, so sometimes one could
put this in a way. There's like there's very
many things that would count as a cause of
the outcome. Um But we nevertheless pick just a
few things, maybe sometimes just one as the cause
of the outcome, right? To give one example, you
might say like, you know, the Big Bang is
a, is a cause of everything, right? But it's
hardly ever the thing that we cite as the
cause of something, right? So we didn't say like,
oh yeah, that window shattered because of the big
bang, you know, that's not really a very satisfying
um explanation. So now what are the kind of
things that determine how we choose to go from,
you know, a cause to the cause? Right. And
the two things that we touched upon that I
think are quite relevant here is on the one
hand, yeah, the kind of normative expectations that we
have because uh I am interested, right? When, when
somebody asks me a question, there's certain things that
I can take for granted that I think like,
OK, they definitely know that part already, right? So,
um there's a classic example when, when like, let's
say, um there's a wildfire and somebody dropped a
match, you might say like, OK, you know, why,
why was there wildfire? Well, because somebody dropped the
match, not because there was oxygen, right? Even though
if there hadn't been oxygen, you know, there wouldn't
have been a wildfire, but that would be a
weird thing to cite, right, in this kind of
context? Because I already assume that, you know, that
there was oxygen present in the scene, right? So
partly it's that we tend to often cite um
unusual events like a abnormal events. Um BECAUSE we
think that those are things that likely the other
person doesn't already know. So I'm helping them by
citing this cause and giving them a more accurate
uh kind of mental model of what happened. So
that's one component I think. Um BUT there's also
some research that has shown and, and for a
long time, uh we um people thought, yeah, that's,
that's the thing, right? There's even like um um
a book by um um art and honorary. So
to um legal legal scholars, causation in the law
um where that's really the focus, right of saying
that, yeah, people focus on these abnormal events. There's
some models also in psychology called the abnormal uh
focus condition model or something like that. And um
but then um some colleagues of mine and I
myself at some point discovered that's not always actually
what people choose as a cause and I'm going
to try to illustrate them um the example here
and it's a little bit um you know, well,
let me, let me take this uh this version
of it. So there's two characters who um who
go into their office, let's say at the same
time. And um and when, um and there's a
kind of a motion detector in the office, maybe
the one that just like turns the turns the
light on, you know, in the office. And this
is either set up in a way such that
um it turns on when, you know, either of
the people like turn up. So it only needs
one, you know, to turn on the motion detector
or it needs two people to turn on this
motion detector. And now, like, in some day, like
the, the, the boss tells one of the people,
um, say Ricardo, he tells Ricardo tomorrow, don't come
into the office. Right? And then, and then he
tells, um, Toby, come, come into the office, you
know, so I'm supposed to go, you're not supposed
to go. Now, we both turn up, Uh But
nonetheless, we both turn up, right? And the, and
the motion detector turns on and then you ask
people, OK, why did the motion detector turn on?
You know, was it because of, you know, Ricardo
or was it because of Toby? But we didn't
give them the option to say like it was
because of both in this case, just to see
whether they would have a preference between the two
and, and what turns out is that in, in
conjunctive scenarios where both of us are needed to
make the outcome happen, people have a strong preference
for the abnormal cause. So that would have been
you in this case, who wasn't supposed to turn
up, right? But when it's a disjunctive scenario, so
that means that either of the causes, it's individually
sufficient to make it happen. So it just needs
one of us to turn up to make this
motion detector turn on. In that case, they actually
se select me as the cause. So the one
who was supposed to turn up, right? And so
we were puzzled by this for a while, like,
oh why is it that in certain causal structures,
people select the normal event as the cause and
in other structures, they select the abnormal event as
the cause. And our idea was here is that
they're in addition, right, too often like wanting to
communicate something that's um you know, unknown to the
other person which drives us generally towards mentioning abnormal
events. We also care about um equipping the other
person with the kind of knowledge that's useful for
them to take good actions in the world. And
this again relates back a little bit also to
our sort of, you know, school shooting example, like
the reason for why people might choose one or
the other is not, it's not that they're communicating
something that the other person doesn't already know, but
they're differing in their beliefs about what the good
actions are, the things that we should change, right?
And, and bringing it back to this example of
the multiple causes. It's, it's it, it turns out
and it might be a little bit tricky to
go into the details here without, you know, um
being able to sort of, you know, draw and
show stuff. But it turns out that um uh
generally if you want the other person to, um
if you think that what the other person wants
to, to be is be in a situation where
they can make a difference to the outcome, right?
Where they can take action such that, oh If
I want to make it happen, I should focus
on this. If I want to prevent it from
happening, I should focus on that. So telling you
about the normal event in the destructive um um
situation puts you in a better position to make
a difference because that's the thing that you want
to focus on Because for example, if you want
to make it happen, it doesn't matter which of
the two you make happen in the disjunctive situation.
But if you want to prevent it from happening,
you really want to focus on the thing that
normally happens. And so, so this is the sort
of like second key component, I think that, that
I've at least, you know, um and others have
come up with say, yeah, when choosing how to
um how to choose among all those things that
were causes of the outcome, which ones to decide.
Well, the ones that will are useful for you
to um you know, updating your beliefs about, you
know, what happened or how the world works. And
then the ones that are helpful for you, if
you had to, if you found yourself in a
situation like that and you wanted to take good
actions, I'll, I'll point out to you that I
think um uh is the, is the most useful
one. And then again, one other interesting thing that
that maybe um relates to is that from some,
from an explanation that somebody chooses, you can make
inferences about, you know, their beliefs about how the
world works and also their motivations, right? Bringing it
back to the example, right? Of the, of the,
of the school shooting, if somebody cites, you know,
mental health as a problem as the cause you
know of the school shooting that tells you something
about them, right? It tells you something about what
their motivations are, how they think the world works,
what they think should be changed, right? And so
we can make inferences um about the person about
their beliefs about their goals, uh from the explanations
that they give
actually that bit about motivations also, I guess, played
a big role during the pandemic when people were
talking about uh dying of COVID or dying with
COVID. Like, for example, there were many people that
were against the lockdowns and the vaccines and other
safety measures that whenever uh people on the news
were talking about the new deaths from COVID, uh
they were like, oh yeah, from those deaths, how
many of them were people who were obese or
people who have cancer because it was then the
obesity or the cancer that killed them were not
COVID?
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So those are, yeah, those are
also super interesting questions and they, and they, they
sort of any sort of like disjunctive scenarios also
that cause some problems actually for simple on a
factual theories because you in your setting, right? It
might very well be like, yeah, this person would
have died anyhow, right? But now that doesn't mean
that we don't want to cite any of these
things like as a cause I'll give another kind
of gruesome example of, of this uh scenario. So,
so take a, take a firing squad, right? Where,
where several people are shooting, you know, one person,
you know, to, to kill them. And now according
to some simple counterfactual theory, each of them might
say like, well, I wasn't the cause of the
person's death, right? Because if I hadn't shot, the
person would still have died anyhow, right? Because this
is a situation in which the outcome is causally
over determined where there are many um causes that
are individually already sufficient to make the outcome happen,
right? And of course, and this is sometimes raised
also as a problem, you know, for counterfactual theories,
right? Um But people have, you know, addressed that
right by saying that, OK, maybe the simple kind
of factual theory is insufficient in these kinds of
cases. So it's not just like imagining if the
person hadn't done something. Um BUT you have to
expand it and think about OK, what are possible
counterfactual contingencies under which the person's action could have
made a difference, right? And so, and that's, and
these accounts have then been sort of, you know,
worked out that make it such that, yeah, in
this scenario, it's still the case that each person,
you know, counts as a cause of the outcome
that we might also have. And this relates a
little bit to, you know what we were saying,
we were going to get it at some point,
you know, like responsibility and morality, you might still
have a sense that their, that their degree of
responsibility is reduced in such settings, right? That like
when outcomes are strongly over determined, so this could
happen in the firing squad, but it could also
happen in an election, right? Um And it might
make quite a big difference. But if you think
like, let's take a small election, right? If the
outcome was, you know, 10 against one versus the
outcome was six versus five, but if it was
six versus five, then each person probably feels high
degree of responsibility for the outcome because if they
just had voted differently, the outcome would have changed.
Whereas if it's 10 to 1, then each of
the person doesn't maybe feel as responsible because it
would have needed a few other people, right? Uh
TO change their mind such that they would have
been in the position that they could have changed
the outcome, right? And so, so, so yeah, so
those things I think are um uh are interesting
like that, that you pointed out in the COVID
example, right? Those were examples of where outcomes were
potentially causally over determined, right? And again, now you
have a little bit of a choice, but you
can say, oh, I choose this one and somebody
says, well, I choose that one, right? And so,
yeah,
so before we get specifically into moral judgment and
how people attribute moral, uh I mean, how basically
they attribute moral responsibility, uh I have just one
more thing that I wanted to ask you about.
You also then work on how people learn about
causal structure in a continuous time setting. So could
you tell us about that? First of all, what
is a continuous time setting? And then what do
you study there specifically?
Yeah, so this is much more in the, in
the branch, right that I mentioned at the beginning,
I mentioned these sort of, you know, three different
uh domains, right of causal cognition, the causal learning
part, the causal reasoning part and the causal judgment
part. Um Most of my work has focused on
the causal judgment explanation part also a little bit
on the causal reasoning part like um that we
have some work on how people can make inferences
about what happened by using evidence from different sense
modalities. Like so more like Sherlock Holmes, like um
you know, vision and sound and in the causal
learning domain, I've primarily worked with um a colleague
of mine um he's a professor at um or
lecturer at University of Edinburgh, Neil Bramley. Um AND,
and he has done a really a lot of
great work. Um AND, and, and in this case,
some of the work that I'm going to be
talking about is with his phd student, um Tia
Wang Tia Gong. Um AND um on sort of
causal learning and continuous time, right? Um So they're
the ideas, right? So, so some of the work
in causal learning and psychology has taken this kind
of uh format where people get data that's kind
of like in a contingency table, like you say,
like sort of discrete chunks, right? It's like, you
know, here are observations of, you know, let's say
day one are this observations of day two are
this or day three are this and maybe not
even with days just like this kind of independent
kind of, you know, discreet samples. And, and there's
the realization that at least again, like you were
saying, we ra we rarely do RCTS in our
everyday life. Like our experience is not quite like
that, right? When we interact with the world, of
course, we experience the world in continuous time that
just means like that time is not discreet, but
it's just sort of, you know, ticking or yeah.
Um um AND um and, and, and, and that
often we don't know, kind of when, when let's
say the first trial ends and the second trial
begins, that's what we have in an experiment. But
in the real world, we don't know. Right. If
I'm again trying to figure out, you know, why,
why my stomach is upset, you know, I don't
know. Was it because of something that I ate,
you know, yesterday or, or two days ago or
because I'm stressed or? Right. There's many, many things
and I sometimes don't know exactly uh, what the
delays are between like, some, some cause. Right. And,
and the effect and that makes, that makes this
a very challenging problem, right? To make causal inferences
in, in continuous time. And so, um but then,
yeah, with Neil and Tia, we sort of, you
know, tackled, tackled that problem um by using again
this kind of paradigm that's quite often used in
causal learning where you think of some kind of
um graph structure. So you have sort of separate
variables from the graphs and what you're trying to
figure out is how those variables are connected to
one another, right? Is it like that A causes
B or that B causes A and so on?
But now in the setting, right, we could, we,
we observed the activations of those variables or which
was little blobs like on the screen, you know,
the participants would see in continuous time. So something
would put up, something else would pop up and
so on. So you would see these kind of
like, you know, patterns of things flashing. Um And
you were trying to figure out, OK, you know
what causes what here and it's a challenging problem.
And, but we allowed participants also in that setup
to then um uh take interventions. So make one
of the blobs, you know, cause it yourself, right?
And also interventions that would turn things off, right?
So you could say like, no, I don't want,
I want to turn this part off now the
system and turn this one on and, and there's
a lot of details like in kind of, you
know, what it is that we found, but I
just sort of highlight um, a few things. Um,
IT turns out this is the kind of paradigm
where, where then uh in terms of causal learning,
people hit like a limit in what it is
that they can process like, you know, relatively quickly.
So if you take some kind of, you know,
normative model here, that doesn't have any, um, kind
of memory constraints, you know, perceives everything, then for
such a model, like more stuff is always better,
right? So it's sort of, um, it could, it
could, it can, it can tease everything, um, apart
and it can, um, whereas for, for a human
learner, that's not necessarily true, right? It's like, um,
sort of like, you know, when you drink from
a, from a fire hose, right? And you all
the water splashes in your face, you're not going
to be able to drink from it, but you'd
have to sort of sip a little bit from
the side right to actually be able to drink
water from, from a, from a fire hose. And
that's what we saw roughly what people were doing
in a paradigm like that. Right. They were really
orchestrating evidence by sort of preventing things from happening
in such a way such that, um, they would
get, um, a good amount of information that they
could still deal with, right, to make inferences about
the underlying structure, um, but would not be overwhelmed
with information such that they wouldn't be able to
um process it anymore. So this was sort of
um one of the high level findings that we
had um in, in that kind of work.
Mhm So let's get into responsibility here then. So
how does causal cognition? Basically everything we've been talking
about here connect to all people, attribute responsibility to
other people.
Yeah. Yeah. So I think we're quite closely connected
um to, to one another and, and, and I
personally, at least when I, when I think about
um responsibility, I think that there are at least
like two higher level questions or kind of key
questions that we um kind of need to ask
ourselves when thinking about the extent to which we
think somebody um you know, is responsible for some
outcome. And one is really sort of just the
causal question, right? It's just saying like, OK, to
what extent do I believe that the actions that
they took? Right? Cause this negative outcome to happen.
Right. And there, we just back to kind of,
you know, a counterfactual world. Um, AND, and, and,
but also kind of counterfactual world, of course, becomes
a little bit more difficult when we now have,
you know, people as the target where we're trying
to think about as opposed to, again, some physical
object or so, because when we're thinking about a
physical object, maybe it's the kind of factual that
comes to mind is sort of natural. Well, what
if that object hadn't been there? But when we
think about people as causes, it's not necessarily clear
that the right kind of factual is them not
having been there, right? If I think for example
about um, oh, to what extent is, you know,
Steph Curry, the point guard of the, of the
warriors and to what extent is he responsible, you
know, for the performance of the warriors? It's not
that you're going to think like, ok, what would
have happened if they had played four against five
instead, right? Just removing him, you know, from from
the scene. But maybe the right kind of counter
factual in this case. And my, my, my student,
Sarah Wu has done some great work on that.
But thinking about the kind of factual operation here
as an operation of replacement, right? Thinking about, well,
what would have happened because replacement seems the relevant
kind of factual intervention here because we know how
basketball works is like, if one player is not
there, they're replaced with someone else, right? And then
the idea is like, how well would they have
done, you know, with this person, you know. Um
SO, so the causal analysis becomes more complicated potentially
when we think about people. But nonetheless, I think
that um counterfactual theories are still like a key
part to answering that causal question. So that's one
key component, what caused a role that the person's
action play in bringing about the outcome. And then
a second key component I believe is what the
action actually tells us about the person, right? And
they sort of our intuitive psychology is critical, right?
So we, we, of course, don't get to observe
people's mental states, you know, directly, all we get
to see is the actions that they take, you
know, the words that they say and so on.
But from those we can make inferences because again,
we have a causal understanding of how people work,
right? Where at least a simple kind of intuitive
theory of psychology is something along the lines of
like, ok, people have beliefs and desires and maybe
they form intentions as part of that and those
intentions bring about actions, right? And so now if
I observe some action and maybe I know something
about what the beliefs of the person are that
allows me to make inferences about what their desires
must have been, right? And so if I believe
that this action um that I observed somebody taking
is actually indicative of a bad desire, right? Like,
oh they wanted for this negative outcome to happen.
Then this is also something that will contribute to
my assessment of responsibility, right? It's saying like um
intuitively, right? If something happens accidentally as an outcome,
I realize like, oh yeah, they were the cause
but they didn't want that, right? I'm not gonna
attribute them as much responsibility. Then when I believe
that they actually brought this about intentionally, they wanted
for this to happen. Um And so I think
these two components are sort of critical when thinking
about responsibility, there may be other factors but those
are things that I have, I'm focused on in,
in, in my research.
Uh AND what about specifically evaluating uh or re
I, I mean, attributing moral judgments to people uh
in function uh of their knowledge, I mean, if
they were knowledgeable or if they were ignorant, I
mean, basically what they knew beforehand, does that matter
to how we hold them responsible for a particular
negative outcome?
Yeah, it certainly does. And I think it actually
affects both of those components, right? Um Because so
the components write about what sort of kind of
factuals come to mind as well, which, which are
relevant to the causal assessment of what, what, you
know, what role the action played as well as
the kind of inferences that I make about the
person, right? But the first part, right. The kind
of factuals that come to mind about, you know,
what they could have done differently will differ. Depending
on if I, if I believe that they knew,
right. If they, if I believe that they knew
what the consequences of their action are, right, then
I think like, well, why did you do that?
You should have done something differently. Right. If I
believe that they were ignorant about what the consequences
of their actions, you know, would be, then there's
no reason to kind of see them in that
sense as the cause of the outcome because it's
not like, you know, they didn't know. So it's
not like they, they um it's a natural thought
to think about, oh, they should have done something
different, right? So the, so the knowledge component influences
what kind of factuals come to mind when assessing
the causal role. And it also matters for the
kind of inferences that we make about the person,
right? Because again, if we know that somebody knew
that this would have a negative consequence that this
would harm someone and they did it nonetheless. Well,
that tells me that they wanted that, that they
wanted that to happen or that they were at
least willing, you know, to make it happen. Whereas
if somebody did not know that this was going
to harm someone, I'm not licensed to make that
inference, right? I can still think like, oh, they
actually didn't know that was gonna happen, they didn't
want for this to happen. So, so on both
of those uh both for both of those parts,
right? Knowledge is sort of um uh really critical
and one interesting kind of um project also that
I kind of quickly um you know, give a
shout out to you on that front is from
my um uh from my postdoc Lara Kel, she's
looked at, at willful ignorance. So this is an
interesting phenomenon where, where somebody is, you know, willingly
ignorant, right? Um And you know, maybe some of
us can kind of, you know, resonate with that
idea. Maybe some of us have, have sort of,
you know, um you know, in, in Germany, if
you take the, you know, the underground and um
in Berlin, like, you know, you, you can board
without a ticket, right? And you could try and
get away with saying, oh, I didn't know you
needed a ticket. I mean, you're probably not going
to get away with that, right? Because, um, you
know, in this case, like the ignorance doesn't protect
you from, from the punishment in this case. Uh
But nonetheless, it sometimes feels like, yeah, we, we,
we are shielding ourselves from certain knowledge. We don't
want to know certain things partly because maybe sometimes
you might think that um um if I knew
that that might give me a reason not to
do it, right? Um So, so one example is
like, people might, a lot of people might be
quite willfully ignorant about, you know, how, how, you
know, a cow is being turned into a steak.
Right. So, they know it's happening, right. But they
don't necessarily want to see the process, right. Because
they really like eating steaks and they feel like
having the relevant knowledge of how this happens might
make them enjoy the steak somewhat less. Right. Um,
AND there's many sort of, you know, phenomenon uh
like that. And so we were just interested right,
in how, how people attribute responsibility to willfully ignorant
agents, right? So agents that um uh make it
such that they don't know. Right? And we find
that it does attenuate the responsibility, attribution like to
some extent. Um But it's not like the same
on the same level as somebody who is, you
know, ignorant. So without, you know, having, um um
having sort of taken actions to get into that
um position of, of ignorance. So, so, yeah, in
short, you know, uh the states of knowledge are
key, right? For both of those components. And um,
yeah, willful ignorance is this interesting intermediate state that,
that, that I at least have only started to
explore.
Mhm. So perhaps there's an element of plausible deniability
here when it comes to willful ignorance because if
you actually don't know, even though perhaps you, you
suspect that you should try to learn about that
specific thing, perhaps it's easier for you to deny
responsibility
that you're, you're exactly right. That's one key motivation
that we think for why sometimes people may choose
to be willfully ignorant. Right. They might, they might
choose it in a situation where they, they're pretty
sure you know what it would be, but they
don't want to know for sure such that when
it happens they can be in the situation of
plausible deniability and then say, like, well, I didn't
know. Right. And so that might be, and, and
that only works, right? Because of course, people are
sensitive to knowledge, right? The fact that that could
in principle count as an excuse, right? That you
didn't know already shows that, um, right. That's a
relevant component when people are attributing, you know, um,
when people are making moral judgments or attributing responsibility,
I imagine that probably one of the darker examples
of that would be someone who suspects that they
might be infected with an ST I, but then
they don't test for it because they want to
keep having sex or, or whatever. I mean, just
partying without assuming responsibility for what they might do
to other people.
That's, that's right. Or, or also like COVID again
is another example. Right. So you, you suspect that
you might have it, you know, you have a
cold, you coughing, but there's this event that you
really want to go to. Right? And so you're
not going to do the test because you don't
want to find out, right? And then it feels,
and then you sort of feel like, oh, I
didn't know, you know that I have it. And
whereas of course, if you did do the test
and you found out you had it, you might
feel like uh now I feel even more shitty,
you know, it's a goal. So this is another
kind of example that probably uh people can kind
of, you know, relate to.
So you mentioned intentions earlier, tell us a little
bit more about that. What role does an agent's
intentions play in the evaluation of moral permissibility, basically?
Yeah, so intentions I think are really key, right?
So intentions give us about give us information again
often we don't, we don't know it directly but
we just know what action somebody took. But intention
is that yes, OK, that's the thing that they,
that they wanted to bring about, right? That was
the goal like of their action. And um and
so um to kind of give maybe a little
bit of a sort of intuition about how we
can tell, you know, one thing apart from another,
right? So we can say like, OK, if somebody
takes some action, there might be like an intended
consequence of that action. So that's the, that's the
outcome that they want to make happen. That's the,
that's the the cause of them acting in that
way. And there might also be certain side effects
that are happening from the action that they're taking.
But those side effects were not necessarily intended, right?
Those were just like things that they also foresaw
maybe would happen. Um, um, AND so, so in
the, in the case, unfortunately, we have a lot
of, you know, wars going on at the moment.
Uh, NOW, so what you might say, oh, intended
things are like, you know, harming like the enemy
and then side effects would be harming civilians, right?
Um And you know, that's not what you want
to do, but certain actions like on, you know,
the enemies cannot be taken without, you know, also,
um bringing about the the unintended side effect in
this case and, and how can we tell apart,
at least in principle kind of what's what, right?
The idea is here that you can again use
a counterfactual analysis. Um And, but now the counterfactual
is applied like, you know, because now it's in
our mind, right? Like the intention is, is a
mental state, right? The counter factual is not applied
now in some sense, you know, to something in
the world like to the relationship between like the
action and the outcome, but rather to the relationship
between um um yeah, the the intended outcome in
the world and the kind of decision the plan
that the person made. So the idea is that
if you want to tell apart um from, you
know, what somebody did, what was intended and what
wasn't the intended thing is the thing that makes
a difference to the person's decision or to the
person's plan, right? Such that if that had been
different, the person would have taken a different decision,
would have taken a different action. Whereas the side
effect, that's not the thing that changes the person's
kind of decision or plan. Right. And so, um
with my colleague, Max Kleinman Weiner, we've explored this
in the context of sort of, you know, trolley
dilemmas. So that's a very, you know, uh common,
um you know, uh paradigm in, in moral psychology,
right? That maybe most people are familiar with where
there's a runaway trolley and then somebody has to
decide whether or not to turn a switch where
the switch would redirect the trolley, right? If they
don't turn the switch, um the people who are
on the main track, you know, would die, maybe
there's five people like on the main track, you
know, who would die. Um And, but if, if
the person turns the switch, then the trolley is
redirected to a sidetrack and then somebody on that
sidetrack is gonna die. And so now let's take
maybe like the standard, one of the standard scenarios,
there's five people on the main track and there's
one person on the side track. And maybe I'll
ask you in this case, would it be permissible
for, let's call him Hank in this case, would
it be permissible for Hank to throw the switch
in that scenario. What do you think?
Uh II, I, I'm not a good test subject
for these kinds of experiments because I, I'm usually,
I, I mean, if people ask me, oh, if
you pull the switch or something like that, uh,
and you deviate the, the direction of the trolley
toward one person or otherwise it would have been
five. I'm just like, oh, but I have nothing
to do with that. Like it just kill the
five.
Yeah. Yeah. So, so that's, that's a very common
response but people don't want to, you know, play
God like they don't want to interfere when it
is about decisions of life and death, right? And
they say like, ok, I'm just gonna close my
eyes, you know, and let nature do its thing
kind of, right? And so that would be an
omission also, right? That you would prefer in this
case, I just don't want to act, you know,
um uh in general though, like if you, if
you make the scenario in this kind of way
and Hank, you know, and, and you ask people,
is it morally permissible for Hank to throw the
switch? Most people do say in the scenario. Yes,
it is morally permissible, right? Um Of course, if
you flipped like how many people are on the
different tracks? Definitely not permissible, not permissible for him
to change it, you know, from one person to
five, right? Um So, but then part is like
also here like, OK, what was the intention? Right.
What was the desire of Hank, um that, that
underlined that decision, right? And presumably the intention was
to save the five, right? The intention was not
to kill the one, even though in some sense,
right? The action is consistent with both of those
things if Hank had wanted to kill the one,
right? And you could change the scenario. Maybe the,
maybe the one person is this absolutely horrible person,
right? Who if they're going to survive, I gonna
cause a lot of trouble in the world, right?
So now the same scenario, you might not say,
well, actually, uh it is more impermissible still. But
now the reason I think for why they did
it was maybe to save the five, right? But
partly really to kill the one, right? And, and
the difference, right, that you could see between these
two scenarios is like, imagine the five hadn't been
there, right? If your intention was to save the
five, in this case, you would not change the
trolley, right? Because now, you know, the reason for
you acting is not there anymore. Whereas if your
intention was to kill the one, right? In the
scenario where the horrible person is on track one,
now, you would still, even if the five weren't
there, you would still switch it, right? And so,
um, so this is kind of this idea, right?
That like you can, you can try to infer
what somebody intended to happen by thinking about what
were the, the outcomes of their decisions that actually
affected, you know, their planning, the way that they
made their decision? And, and then I think about,
um, from that right, that affects whether I take
the action to be more morally permissible. So for
moral permissibility, it's like what inferences can I make
about what it is that they intended? And then
I also care about um actually sort of again,
the consequences of their actions similar to when I
was saying in responsibility, right? It's sort of the,
the causal role that the action played and what
it is that the action told me about them.
So in this case, right, the, the, the causal
consequences kind of how many people died and in
general you want fewer people to die. Um And
then what does it tell me like about the
person in this case? What it is that they
intended to happen?
Well, it just came to my mind, this never
crossed my mind before that when you were talking
about intentions and diverting the trolley from the five
people track to the one person track. What if
there was someone like a psychopath that was like,
oh, now I have the opportunity of killing one
person and I will get away with her because
it will be me causing the
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, you're right. And, and if that's
the, again, you know, if that's the person, right?
You think, like, ok, well, I'm not sure how
permissible that is. Right? Because in some sense, you
know, it didn't change anything about and it's interesting
related to, right, like this, this idea now with
the, with the psychopath, right? And often, you know,
there's this, these, these things are sometimes set up
in a way that, such that, you know, utilitarian
principles, the principles about, you know, trying to bring,
you know, the greatest good to the, you know,
most people or in this case, avoiding harm, you
know, to the most people come in conflict with
um other principles like deontological principles of, you know,
moral action that pertain more to like uh following
certain rules like, you know, thou shalt not kill,
right? And, and sometimes there's interesting conflict, right? There
might be certain actions that are from a utilitarian
perspective, potentially justifiable, right? But at the same time,
it would be pretty, you know, gruesome to do,
right? Um There's one example of that kind again,
that might not be a great example, but it
could be like, oh, you know, there's five people
who need organs, right? And then there's one person
and you just, you know, kill that person to
give the organs to the other people and save
the five, right? Um So, you know, maybe that's
not justifiable on any perspective, but you could at
least see in principle from a utilitarian calculus that,
that it could be the kind of thing that
could be justifiable. Right. But it also would be
really psychopath style, right? For someone to, you know,
to, to do that. Right. And so, so there's
sometimes this, um, disconnect between, like, ok, you know,
and, and some studies have shown that, that they
might think, like, ok, yeah, that's a more morally
permissible thing to do in a situation, but I
would not want to be their friend if that
makes sense. Right. And that's a disconnect, right? Between
again, the two components, right? The sort of causal
role. OK. Maybe that's good. But the inference that
I make about the person is like, yeah, they're
kind of a psychopath. So that's not the kind
of person who I would want to be with.
Right.
So, so those things also happen for, for moral
judgments.
Yeah, because actually the outcome is very different uh
in the, the two scenarios. But there, there's this
very strong intuition that if uh something that you
didn't do, you didn't put the people on the
tracks and you didn't want the trolley running. I
mean, you have nothing to do with that. But
if you pull the lever now you have something
to do with it.
That's right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. And it's,
again, there's a lot of work, right? Showing that
in these kind of situations, people often get default
to not, you know, to omitting right? To not
wanting to do anything about it.
Yeah. So, I, I mean, I guess that we
could say here then that and this is very
counterintuitive but there's somewhat of a relationship between intuitive
physics and intuitive psychology on the one hand, and
moral judgment, on the other hand,
yeah, I'm not sure how counterintuitive that is. Hopefully
not. But, um, but my sense is right that,
yeah, in many, you know, everyday situations, even, like,
I mean, the trolley is sort of a simple
one because maybe my intuitive physical understanding here is
not, you know, strained all that much, but still,
you know, you needed it, right? I needed to
be able to tell you that the trolley was
going to go this way and otherwise it would
go that way and that there was a switch,
you know, that would make the difference. So, so
in many situations that when we are, at least
in our sort of embedded in our everyday lives,
we, we don't get um sometimes let's say this
kind of stylized information that we might use, you
know, in, in vignettes or scenarios in a, in
a psychology experiment, right? We have to derive that
information from seeing people interact, you know, in, in
the physical world. And um and a lot of
a lot of factors, you know, are of relevance
and play out in these situations. Take for example,
like a notion of a capacity or ability that
somebody might have. We touched a little bit on
that again, in a sort of discreet stylized version
of it with the lifeguard, right? That's an ability,
right? That the person has or doesn't have. Um
um BUT again, you know, it's a simple example,
but I need to bring together, right? My physical
understanding, namely somebody jumping in the water and being
able to swim, right? With my kind of intuitive
psychological uh um understanding, right? It's like, ok, what
can somebody do and what they were supposed to
do? Right. And now you could imagine, right? Just
kind of in not necessarily a nice experiment in
this case, but again, a plausible one, you know,
manipulate how far it is that the person is
away, you know, from the beach when they're drowning,
right? And so you could now think about, OK,
was this something that the person, you know, could
have achieved? Right? Um And so there's sort of
physical knowledge that comes to bear like on this
question, um that combines right with the, with the
psycho psychological knowledge or again, maybe in a non
moral domain, but something that at least some of
the uh listeners, particularly, maybe the American ones can
kind of relate to. Um SO kind of factuals
also come up there in, in, in many sports.
So there's a um there's a, there's a um
there's a foul like in American football called, you
know, pass interference and, and what that foul is
like if it basically is when the, you know,
when the quarterback and I know relatively little about,
uh, about American football, but this is one thing,
hopefully that I get roughly, right. So when
I'm also more about soccer, like normal football,
a kind of fact has come out there too,
but like, you know, I'll use this example for
now. So the quarterback throws the ball right and
then the receiver before the receiver catches the ball,
Um the defender is not allowed to interfere with
the receiver. So they're not allowed to like kind
of push them, they can try to, you know,
catch the ball, but they're not allowed to interfere
with the receiver. But now, and, and pass interference
is the foul call when the, when the referees
believe that the defender actually interfered with the receiver
before the receiver was able to kind of catch
the ball, right. But now importantly, it's only past
interference when the receiver could have caught the ball,
right. So that's a counterfactual, right? So, and that's
a call for the referees to decide like, yeah,
that's the kind of ball that the receiver could
have in principle caught and only if that's the
case, is it a foul? Right? So again, this
is not necessarily moral reasoning in this case here,
but it sort of brings to mind that like,
yeah, our ability to think about how people are
interacting with each other in the physical world, what
kind of abilities they have because even like in
the past interference call, right. Uh It might be
past interference for, you know, some ex but football
player that wouldn't have been past interference for me
because I'm slow. Right? And whereas this person is
really fast, so thinking about what that person could
have done is different from what I could have
done. And that brings together again the knowledge of
the physical world and our knowledge of people to
simulate what these relevant counter factuals would have looked
like. And so, so they really come together when
deciding um uh about whether whether what's morally permissible
or not. Um Mostly through this mechanism of thinking
about what the possibilities are, what the person could
have achieved, could not have achieved what they should
have done and should not have done and so
on.
Great. So, Doctor Gerstenberg, I think that this would
probably be a good point to end the interview
on uh just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find you and
your work on the internet? And I don't know
if you also want to mention what you're working
on at the moment. So, yeah,
sure. So you can find me on the internet.
I mean, probably just by Googling. Uh MY name,
right. I'm also on, on Twitter at uh X
now, I guess it's called the handle Toby GBG
and I'm also on blue sky. So those are
places you can find me, my lab, the causality
and cognition lab also has a youtube channel, you
know, once this is out, I think I will
link to it um as well. Um So those
are places where you can find about, find out
about, you know, myself and, and, and my work
and then in terms of things that we're currently
working about 11 area that I didn't, you know,
get to talk so much in our, um um
you know, right now, but that I'm excited about
is more on the kind of, you know, we,
we mostly talked about the causal learning and the
causal judgment part. But I've also been quite interested
in the causal reasoning part. And there's a bigger
project that we're interested in is really in how
people, you know, how people are sort of like
intuitive detectives, sometimes like Sherlock Holmes or Miss Marple
and how they can draw on different sources of
evidence often. So there's visual evidence, but sometimes also
we have auditory evidence, the kind of sounds, you
know, that happened, um and how we can use
these different pieces of information to figure out what
happened in the past. So just to give you
maybe like one intuitive example, so imagine that you,
um you know, the person who you live with,
you know, your partner or roommate or something does
something in the kitchen, you just hear the sounds,
but based on the sounds, you know, exactly what
it is that they're doing right. You might even
know exactly what it is that they're cooking just
by hearing, like, oh, they're going to the fridge
now. They're picking up these things. Oh, I can
hear they're cracking the eggs or they're making an
omelet, you know, and so all this stuff in
some sense, all you have is just the sounds.
But be, because, you know, kind of your kitchen
and, you know, what people roughly do, you can
kind of reconstruct in your mind, what it is
that they're doing um by combining these auditory information
with your intuitive theory of how the world works.
And that's something that I'm quite excited about, kind
of studying that and understanding that better. But the
limits are of people doing it, doing that and
how they draw. Yeah, from these different sense modalities
to figure out what happened by mentally simulating possibilities
in their mind. So that's one of the things
that I'm quite excited about.
Great. So thank you so much again for taking
the time to come on the show. It's been
really fun to talk with you.
Awesome. Yeah, I had a great time. Thanks so
much, Ricardo.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs called in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel. S Friends, David Sloan
Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego and Jan Punter
Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi,
Nale Me, Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franca Lati Gilon Cortez or Sole Scott ZFTW,
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio
Theophanous. Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams Di
Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Chao, Marie Martinez,
Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior, Old Einon Starry
Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff
mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor
Luke Neeson, Chris to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica.
No, Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man George
Katis Valentine Steinman Perros, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner
Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca
Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon Bendik
Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin Carlman, Negro.
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie.
Thank you for all.